The lion’s fearless reputation is well-founded.
Lions are Africa’s largest native cat.
A full-grown male can weigh up to 230 kilograms,
or about 500 pounds.
Females are smaller
but can still weigh up to 180 kilograms,
or nearly 400 pounds.
Lions successfully hunt animals
as large as buffalo and hippos!
Lions are the only cats
that live together in social groups.
These groups, called prides,
normally consist
of related females and their cubs
along with a small number of resident males.
Healthy adult lions have no natural predators.
However, lions face a threat
from a surprising source.
What is it?
Other lions.
Lions are territorial.
They will attack and kill other lions
in an attempt to take over their hunting territory.
Lion cubs face another danger.
Groups of rival males
will attempt to drive off the resident males
and take over the pride.
If the invading males are successful,
they will try to kill the cubs
that were fathered by other lions.
The invading males
can then father cubs of their own.
On their own,
the tiny cubs would be defenseless.
But lions vigorously defend their cubs.
Both males and females protect the pride
from other lions.
A mother lion will defend her cubs
even though she may be injured
or killed by a larger invading male.
Several mothers
may defend their cubs collectively,
giving the cubs a better chance of survival.
Horses were often used in ancient battles.
A charging horse was a powerful weapon.
The mere presence of cavalry
or chariots on the battlefield
was intimidating to opposing armies.
However, horses needed training
to be effective in battle.
Horses are not naturally courageous.
Without proper training,
a horse could be a liability on the battlefield.
Why?
Because of their keen eyesight and hearing,
horses easily become startled.
Horses have a nearly 360-degree range of vision.
Ancient battlefields were filled with sights
that tended to terrify horses.
For this reason, ancient warriors
sometimes put blinders on horses.
Horses have 16 muscles
that control each of their ears.
They can move their ears
to hear sounds more clearly.
A horse can hear
the sound of danger before a human.
The possibility of horses panicking in battle
was a constant danger.
Ancient armies would deliberately try to frighten
their enemy’s horses to induce chaos.
How was a horse trained for battle?
Their trainers exposed the horse
to sights and sounds
similar to those encountered on the battlefield.
Gradually, the horse would overcome its fear.
When trained properly,
instead of fleeing at the sound of battle,
a courageous warhorse
would excitedly run towards it.
Across southern Asia
lives a small mammal that is surprisingly fearless
—the Indian gray mongoose.
This furry creature is relatively small,
typically measuring less than a meter,
or three feet,
in length from head to tail.
Despite its small size,
the mongoose is, in fact, a bold predator.
It feeds on various small creatures,
but the most famous of its prey
are venomous snakes, such as the king cobra.
Several species of mongoose,
including the Indian gray mongoose,
are known for their ability
to kill venomous snakes.
What protects the mongoose
as it fights a venomous snake?
The Indian gray mongoose’s thick fur
is composed of stiff hairs that stand erect
when the mongoose is excited or angry.
This fur serves as a protective layer
to prevent a snake from biting into its flesh.
However, if it is bitten,
the mongoose
has an internal defense mechanism
—a tolerance to snake venom.
The mongoose is amazingly fast and agile.
When the snake strikes,
the mongoose swiftly moves
out of the way and avoids the bite.
The mongoose
also possesses incredible stamina.
It can keep fighting until the snake tires out.
When the mongoose makes its final attack,
it strikes the snake
at just the right location to kill it.
The mongoose is endowed
with defenses and abilities
that enable it
to fearlessly fight and defeat the snake.
Found only in North and South America,
hummingbirds are
among the smallest of all birds.
Although the more than 300 species
of hummingbirds vary in size,
most species are between 6 and 12 centimeters,
or 2.4 and 4.7 inches, in length.
To the human eye,
the beating
of a hummingbird’s wings is just a blur.
Because its wingbeat is so rapid,
this tiny bird generates
a humming noise as it flies.
The smaller the hummingbird,
the faster its wingbeat.
Larger hummingbirds beat their wings
around 10 to 20 times per second;
smaller hummingbirds may beat their wings
70 to 80 times per second in normal flight.
Hummingbirds can fly forward and backward,
sideways,
straight up and down, and,
for brief periods, even upside down.
They hover in place
as they feed on flower nectar.
But these beautiful little birds
do not have charming temperaments.
Hummingbirds aggressively defend
desirable sources of nectar,
attempting to drive off other hummingbirds
that invade their feeding territory.
Females defend their nests.
Especially during mating season,
males of most hummingbird species
defend their breeding territory.
Because of their agility in flight,
hummingbirds can chase away
much larger birds,
such as crows and hawks.
They will even dive at humans.
Despite their tiny size,
hummingbirds are ready to defend themselves
and the things
that are essential for their survival.
A herd of African elephants
is an impressive sight.
An elephant family group consists
of related adult females and their young.
The close-knit family group
provides support to its members.
Elephants have an excellent memory,
and this strengthens their social bonds.
They recognize and remember one another,
even after long periods of separation.
When a young elephant is in distress,
older elephants reassure
and comfort the young one
by coming near
and touching it with their body or trunk.
If an elephant is weak or injured,
other elephants may attempt to help it to its feet
and assist it to stand.
From the older members of the family group,
young elephants learn vital survival skills,
including how to find food and water.
To find water in times of drought,
the herd may need to travel great distances.
The older elephants lead the way,
helping younger ones make the trip.
How do the elephants know where to go?
Older elephants remember for decades
where water can be found,
even in locations hundreds of miles away.
They teach these locations
to the younger generation.
The family group
also provides protection from predators.
An elephant may charge an attacker
and use its tusks, trunk, and feet as weapons.
To protect the calves, adults encircle them,
standing between them and the predators.
If a member of the herd is seriously wounded,
other elephants, including young ones,
may courageously come to its defense.